<div class="bk2"><h1> <b>the<br>
man<br>
the<br>
martians<br>
made</b></h1>
<h2> <small><i>by ... Frank Belknap Long</i></small></h2>
<p class="pr1"><span class="xhtml_big"><b>No mortal had ever seen the Martians, but they had heard their
whisperings—without knowing the terrible secret they kept hidden.</b></span></p></div>
<p class="cap"><span class="smcap">There was death</span> in the camp.</p>
<p>I knew when I awoke that it
had come to stand with us in the
night and was waiting now for
the day to break and flood the
desert with light. There was a
prickling at the base of my scalp
and I was drenched with cold
sweat.</p>
<p>I had an impulse to leap up and
go stumbling about in the darkness.
But I disciplined myself.
I crossed my arms and waited for
the sky to grow bright.</p>
<p>Daybreak on Mars is like nothing
you've ever dreamed about.
You wake up in the morning, and
there it is—bright and clear and
shining. You pinch yourself, you
sit up straight, but it doesn't
vanish.</p>
<p>Then you stare at your hands
with the big callouses. You reach
for a mirror to take a look at your
face. That's not so good. That's
where ugliness enters the picture.
You look around and you see
Ralph. You see Harry. You see
the women.</p>
<p>On Earth a woman may not
look her glamorous best in the
harsh light of early dawn, but if
she's really beautiful she doesn't
look too bad. On Mars even the
most beautiful woman looks angry
on arising, too weary and tormented
by human shortcomings to
take a prefabricated metal shack
and turn it into a real home for a
man.</p>
<p>You have to make allowances
for a lot of things on Mars. You
have to start right off by accepting
hardship and privation as your
daily lot. You have to get accustomed
to living in construction
camps in the desert, with the red
dust making you feel all hollow
and dried up inside. Making you
feel like a drum, a shriveled pea
pod, a salted fish hung up to dry.
Dust inside of you, rattling
around, canal water seepage rotting
the soles of your boots.</p>
<p>So you wake up and you stare.
The night before you'd collected
driftwood and stacked it by the
fire. The driftwood has disappeared.
Someone has stolen your
very precious driftwood. The
Martians? Guess again.</p>
<p>You get up and you walk
straight up to Ralph with your
shoulders squared. You say,
"Ralph, why in hell did you have
to steal my driftwood?"</p>
<p>In your mind you say that.
You say it to Dick, you say it to
Harry. But what you really say is,
"Larsen was here again last
night!"</p>
<p>You say, I put a fish on to boil
and Larsen ate it. I had a nice
deck of cards, all shiny and new,
and Larsen marked them up. It
wasn't me cheating. It was Larsen
hoping I'd win so that he could
waylay me in the desert and get
all of the money away from me.</p>
<p>You have a girl. There aren't
too many girls in the camps with
laughter and light and fire in
them. But there are a few, and
if you're lucky you take a fancy
to one particular girl—her full
red lips and her spun gold hair.
All of a sudden she disappears.
Somebody runs off with her. It's
Larsen.</p>
<p>In every man there is a
slumbering giant. When life roars
about you on a world that's
rugged and new you've got to go
on respecting the lads who have
thrown in their lot with you, even
when their impulses are as harsh
as the glint of sunlight on a desert-polished
tombstone.</p>
<p>You think of a name—Larsen.
You start from scratch and you
build Larsen up until you have a
clear picture of him in your mind.
You build him up until he's a
great shouting, brawling, golden
man like Paul Bunyon.</p>
<p>Even a wicked legend can seem
golden on Mars. Larsen wasn't
just my slumbering giant—or
Dick's, or Harry's. He was the
slumbering giant in all of us, and
that's what made him so tremendous.
Anything gigantic has
beauty and power and drive to it.</p>
<p>Alone we couldn't do anything
with Larsen's gusto, so when some
great act of wickedness was done
with gusto how could it be us?
Here comes Larsen! He'll shoulder
all the guilt, but he won't feel
guilty because he's the first man
in Eden, the child who never
grew up, the laughing boy, Hercules
balancing the world on his
shoulders and looking for a
woman with long shining tresses
and eyes like the stars of heaven
to bend to his will.</p>
<p>If such a woman came to life in
Hercules' arms would you like the
job of stopping him from sending
the world crashing? Would you
care to try?</p>
<p>Don't you see? Larsen was
closer to us than breathing and
as necessary as food and drink
and our dreams of a brighter tomorrow.
Don't think we didn't
hate him at times. Don't think
we didn't curse and revile him.
You may glorify a legend from
here to eternity, but the luster
never remains completely untarnished.</p>
<p>Larsen wouldn't have seemed
completely real to us if we hadn't
given him muscles that could tire
and eyes that could blink shut in
weariness. Larsen had to sleep,
just as we did. He'd disappear for
days.</p>
<p>We'd wink and say, "Larsen's
getting a good long rest this time.
But he'll be back with something
new up his sleeve, don't you
worry!"</p>
<p>We could joke about it, sure.
When Larsen stole or cheated we
could pretend we were playing a
game with loaded dice—not really
a deadly game, but a game full of
sound and fury with a great rousing
outburst of merriment at the
end of it.</p>
<p>But there are deadlier games by
far. I lay motionless, my arms
locked across my chest, sweating
from every pore. I stared at
Harry. We'd been working all
night digging a well, and in a few
days water would be bubbling up
sweet and cool and we wouldn't
have to go to the canal to fill
our cooking utensils. Harry was
blinking and stirring and I could
tell just by looking at him that
he was uneasy too. I looked beyond
him at the circle of shacks.</p>
<p>Most of us were sleeping in the
open, but there were a few youngsters
in the shacks and women too
worn out with drudgery to care
much whether they slept in
smothering darkness or under the
clear cold light of the stars.</p>
<p>I got slowly to my knees,
scooped up a handful of sand, and
let it dribble slowly through my
fingers. Harry looked straight at
me and his eyes widened in alarm.
It must have been the look on my
face. He arose and crossed to
where I was sitting, his mouth
twitching slightly. There was
nothing very reassuring about
Harry. Life had not been kind to
him and he had resigned himself
to accepting the slings and arrows
of outrageous fortune without protest.
He had one of those
emaciated, almost skull-like faces
which terrify children, and make
women want to cry.</p>
<p>"You don't look well, Tom," he
said. "You've been driving yourself
too hard."</p>
<p>I looked away quickly. I had
to tell him, but anything terrifying
could demoralize Harry and
make him throw his arm before
his face in blind panic. But I
couldn't keep it locked up inside
me an instant longer.</p>
<p>"Sit down, Harry," I whispered.
"I want to talk to you. No sense
in waking the others."</p>
<p>"Oh," he said.</p>
<p>He squatted beside me on the
sand, his eyes searching my face.
"What is it, Tom?"</p>
<p>"I heard a scream," I said. "It
was pretty awful. Somebody has
been hurt—bad. It woke me up,
and that takes some doing."</p>
<p>Harry nodded. "You sleep like
a log," he said.</p>
<p>"I just lay still and listened," I
said, "with my eyes wide open.
Something moved out from the
well—a two-legged something. It
didn't make a sound. It was big,
Harry, and it seemed to melt into
the shadows. I don't know what
kept me from leaping up and
going after it. It had something
to do with the way I felt. All
frozen up inside."</p>
<p>Harry appeared to understand.
He nodded, his eyes darting
toward the well. "How long ago
was that?"</p>
<p>"Ten—fifteen minutes."</p>
<p>"You just waited for me to
wake up?"</p>
<p>"That's right," I said. "There
was something about the scream
that made me want to put off finding
out. Two's company—and
when you're alone with something
like that it's best to talk it over
before you act."</p>
<p>I could see that Harry was
pleased. Unnerved too, and horribly
shaken. But he was pleased
that I had turned to him as a
friend I could trust. When you
can't depend on life for anything
else it's good to know you have a
friend.</p>
<p>I brushed sand from my
trousers and got up. "Come on,"
I said. "We'll take a look."</p>
<p>It was an ordeal for him. His
face twitched and his eyes
wavered. He knew I hadn't lied
about the scream. If a single
scream could unnerve me that
much it had to be bad.</p>
<p>We walked to the well in complete
silence. There were shadows
everywhere, chill and forbidding.
Almost like people they seemed,
whispering together, huddling
close in ominous gossipy silence,
aware of what we would find.</p>
<p>It was a sixty-foot walk from
the fire to the well. A walk in the
sun—a walk in the bright hot sun
of Mars, with utter horror perhaps
at the end of it.</p>
<p>The horror was there. Harry
made a little choking noise deep
in his throat, and my heart started
pounding like a bass drum.</p>
<h3>II</h3>
<p>The man on the sand had no
top to his head. His skull had been
crushed and flattened so hideously
that he seemed like a wooden
figure resting there—an anatomical
dummy with its skull-case
lifted off.</p>
<p>We looked around for the skull-case,
hoping we'd find it, hoping
we'd made a mistake and stumbled
by accident into an open-air dissecting
laboratory and were looking
at ghastly props made of
plastic and glittering metal instead
of bone and muscle and flesh.</p>
<p>But the man on the sand had a
name. We'd known him for weeks
and talked to him. He wasn't a
medical dummy, but a corpse.
His limbs were hideously convulsed,
his eyes wide and staring.
The sand beneath his head was
clotted with dried blood. We
looked for the weapon which had
crushed his skull but couldn't find
it.</p>
<p>We looked for the weapon before
we saw the footprints in the
sand. Big they were—incredibly
large and massive. A man with a
size-twelve shoe might have left
such prints if the leather had become
a little soggy and spread out
around the soles.</p>
<p>"The poor guy," Harry whispered.</p>
<p>I knew how he felt. We had all
liked Ned. A harmless little guy
with a great love of solitude, a
guy who hadn't a malicious hair
in his head. A happy little guy
who liked to sing and dance in
the light of a high-leaping fire. He
had a banjo and was good at
music making. Who could have
hated Ned with a rage so primitive
and savage? I looked at Harry
and saw that he was wondering
the same thing.</p>
<p>Harry looked pretty bad, about
ready to cave in. He was leaning
against the well, a tormented fury
in his eyes.</p>
<p>"The murderous bastard," he
muttered. "I'd like to get him by
the throat and choke the breath
out of him. Who'd want to do a
thing like that to Ned."</p>
<p>"I can't figure it either," I said.</p>
<p>Then I remembered. I don't
think Molly Egan really could
have loved Ned. The curious thing
about it was that Ned didn't even
need the kind of love she could
have given him. He was a self-sufficient
little guy despite his
frailness and didn't really need a
woman to look after him. But
Molly must have seen something
pathetic in him.</p>
<p>Molly was a beautiful woman
in her own right, and there wasn't
a man in the camp who hadn't
envied Ned. It was puzzling, but
it could have explained why Ned
was lying slumped on the sand
with a bashed-in skull. It could
have explained why someone had
hated him enough to kill him.</p>
<p>Without lifting a finger Ned had
won Molly's love. That could
make some other guy as mad as
a caged hyena—the wrong sort
of other guy. Even a small man
could have shattered Ned's skull,
but the prints on the sand were
big.</p>
<p>How many men in the camp
wore size-twelve shoes? That was
the sixty-four dollar question, and
it hung in the shimmering air between
Harry and myself like an
unspoken challenge. We could
almost see the curve of the big
question mark suspended in the
dazzle.</p>
<p>I thought awhile, looking at
Harry. Then I took a long, deep
breath and said, "We'd better talk
it over with Bill Seaton first. If it
gets around too fast those footprints
will be trampled flat. And
if tempers start rising anything
could happen."</p>
<p>Harry nodded. Bill was the
kind of guy you could depend on
in an emergency. Cool, poised,
efficient, with an air of authority
that commanded respect. He could
be pigheaded at times, but his
sense of justice was as keen as a
whip.</p>
<p>Harry and I walked very quietly
across a stretch of tumbled sand
and halted at the door to Bill's
shack. Bill was a bachelor and
we knew there'd be no woman
inside to put her foot down and
tell him he'd be a fool to act as a
lawman. Or would there be? We
had to chance it.</p>
<p>Law-enforcement is a thankless
job whether on Earth or on
Mars. That's why it attracts the
worst—and the best. If you're a
power-drunk sadist you'll take the
job just for the pleasure it gives
you. But if you're really interested
in keeping violence within
bounds so that fairly decent
lads get a fighting chance to build
for the future, you'll take the job
with no thought of reward beyond
the simple satisfaction of lending
a helping hand.</p>
<p>Bill Seaton was such a man,
even if he did enjoy the limelight
and liked to be in a position of
command.</p>
<p>"Come on, Harry," I said. "We
may as well wake him up and get
it over with."</p>
<p>We went into the shack. Bill
was sleeping on the floor with his
long legs drawn up. His mouth
was open and he was snoring
lustily. I couldn't help thinking
how much he looked like an overgrown
grasshopper. But that was
just a first impression springing
from overwrought nerves.</p>
<p>I bent down and shook Bill
awake. I grabbed his arm and
shook him until his jaw snapped
shut and he shot up straight, suddenly
galvanized. Instantly the
grotesque aspect fell from him.
Dignity came upon him and enveloped
him like a cloak.</p>
<p>"Ned, you say? The poor little
cuss! So help me—if I get my
hands on the rat who did it I'll
roast him over a slow fire!"</p>
<p>He got up, staggered to an
equipment locker, and took out a
sun helmet and a pair of shorts.
He dressed quickly, swearing constantly
and staring out the door
at the bright dawn glow as if he
wanted to send both of his fists
crashing into the first suspicious
guy to cross his path.</p>
<p>"We can't have those footprints
trampled," he muttered.
"There are a lot of dumb bastards
here who don't know the first thing
about keeping pointers intact.
Those prints may be the only thing
we'll have to go on."</p>
<p>"Just the three of us can handle
it, Bill," I said. "When you decide
what should be done we can wake
the others."</p>
<p>Bill nodded. "Keeping it quiet
is the important thing. We'll carry
him back here. When we break
the news I want that body out of
sight."</p>
<p>Harry and Bill and I—we took
another walk in the sun. I looked
at Harry, and the greenish tinge
which had crept into his face gave
me a jolt. He's taking this pretty
hard, I thought. If I hadn't known
him so well I might have jumped
to an ugly conclusion. But I just
couldn't imagine Harry quarreling
with Ned over Molly.</p>
<p>How was I taking it myself? I
raised my hand and looked at it.
There was no tremor. Nerves
steady, brain clear. No pleasure
in enforcing the law—pass that
buck to Bill. But there was a
gruesome job ahead, and I was
standing up to it as well as could
be expected.</p>
<p>Ever try lifting a corpse? The
corpse of a stranger is easier to
lift than the corpse of a man
you've known and liked. Harry
and I lifted him together. Between
us the dead weight didn't seem too
intolerable—not at first. But it
quickly became a terrible, heavy
limpness that dragged at our arms
like some soggy log dredged up
from the dark waters of the canal.</p>
<p>We carried him into the shack
and eased him down on the floor.
His head fell back and his eyes
lolled.</p>
<p>Death is always shameful. It
strips away all human reticences
and makes a mockery of human
dignity and man's rebellion against
the cruelty of fate.</p>
<p>For a moment we stood staring
down at all that was left of Ned.
I looked at Bill. "How many men
in the camp wear number-twelve
shoes?"</p>
<p>"We'll find out soon enough."</p>
<p>All this time we hadn't mentioned
Larsen. Not one word
about Larsen, not one spoken
word. Cheating, yes. Lying,
and treacherous disloyalty, and
viciousness, and spite. Fights
around the campfires at midnight,
battered faces and broken wrists
and a cursing that never ceased.
All that we could blame on Larsen.
But a harmless little guy
lying dead by a well in a spreading
pool of blood—that was an
outrage that stopped us dead in
our legend-making tracks.</p>
<p>There is something in the
human mind which recoils from
too outrageous a deception. How
wonderful it would have been to
say, "Larsen was here again last
night. He found a little guy who
had never harmed anyone standing
by a well in the moonlight.
Just for sheer delight he decided
to kill the little guy right then
and there." Just to add luster to
the legend, just to send a thrill of
excitement about the camp.</p>
<p>No, that would have been the
lie colossal which no sane man
could have quite believed.</p>
<p>Something happened then to
further unnerve us.</p>
<p>The most disturbing sound you
can hear on Mars is the whispering.
Usually it begins as a barely
audible murmur and swells in
volume with every shift of the
wind. But now it started off high
pitched and insistent and did not
stop.</p>
<p>It was the whispering of a dying
race. The Martians are as elusive
as elves and all the pitiless logic
of science had failed to draw
them forth into the sunlight to
stand before men in uncompromising
arrogance as peers of
the human race.</p>
<p>That failure was a tragedy in
itself. If man's supremacy is to
be challenged at all let it be by a
creature of flesh-and-blood, a big-brained
biped who must kill to
live. Better that by far than a
ghostly flickering in the deepening
dusk, a whispering and a flapping
and a long-drawn sighing
prophesying death.</p>
<p>Oh, the Martians were real
enough. A flitting vampire bat is
real, or a stinging ray in the depths
of a blue lagoon. But who could
point to a Martian and say, "I
have seen you plain, in broad daylight.
I have looked into your
owlish eyes and watched you go
flitting over the sand on your thin,
stalklike legs? I know there is
nothing mysterious about you.
You are like a water insect skimming
the surface of a pond in a
familiar meadow on Earth. You
are quick and alert, but no match
for a man. You are no more than
an interesting insect."</p>
<p>Who could say that, when there
were ruins buried deep beneath
the sand to give the lie to any such
idea. First the ruins, and then
the Martians themselves, always
elusive, gnomelike, goblinlike,
flitting away into the dissolving
dusk.</p>
<p>You're a comparative archaeologist
and you're on Mars with
the first batch of rugged youngsters
to come tumbling out of a
spaceship with stardust in their
eyes. You see those youngsters
digging wells and sweating in the
desert. You see the prefabricated
housing units go up, the tangle of
machinery, the camp sites growing
lusty with midnight brawls and
skull-cracking escapades. You see
the towns in the desert, the law-enforcement
committees, the camp
followers, the reform fanatics.</p>
<p>You're a sober-minded scholar,
so you start digging in the ruins.
You bring up odd-looking cylinders,
rolls of threaded film, instruments
of science so complex they
make you giddy.</p>
<p>You wonder about the Martians—what
they were like when they
were a young and proud race. If
you're an archaeologist you
wonder. But Bill and I—we were
youngsters still. Oh, sure, we were
in our thirties, but who would
have suspected that? Bill looked
twenty-seven and I hadn't a gray
hair in my head.</p>
<h3>III</h3>
<p>Bill nodded at Harry. "You'd
better stay here. Tom and I will
be asking some pointed questions,
and our first move will depend on
the answers we get. Don't let
anyone come snooping around
this shack. If anyone sticks his
head in and starts to turn ugly,
warn him just once—then shoot
to kill." He handed Harry a gun.</p>
<p>Harry nodded grimly and
settled himself on the floor close
to Ned. For the first time since
I'd known him, Harry looked
completely sure of himself.</p>
<p>As we emerged from the shack
the whispering was so loud the
entire camp had been placed on
the alert. There would be no need
for us to go into shack after shack,
watching surprise and shock come
into their eyes.</p>
<p>A dozen or more men were
between Bill's shack and the well.
They were staring grimly at the
dawn, as if they could already see
blood on the sky, spilling over
on the sand and spreading out in
a sinister pool at their feet. A
mirage-like pool mirroring their
own hidden forebodings, mirroring
a knotted rope and the straining
shoulders of men too vengeful
to know the meaning of restraint.</p>
<p>Jim Kenny stood apart and
alone, about forty feet from the
well, staring straight at us. His
shirt was open at the throat, exposing
a patch of hairy chest, and
his big hands were wedged deeply
into his belt. He stood about six
feet three, very powerful, and with
large feet.</p>
<p>I nudged Bill's arm. "What do
you think?" I asked.</p>
<p>Kenny did seem a likely suspect.
Molly had caught his eye
right from the start, and he had
lost no time in pursuing her. A
guy like Kenny would have felt
that losing out to a man of his
own breed would have been a terrible
blow to his pride. But just
imagine Kenny losing out to a
little guy like Ned. It would have
infuriated him and glazed his eyes
with a red film of hate.</p>
<p>Bill answered my question
slowly, his eyes on Kenny's
cropped head. "I think we'd better
take a look at his shoes," he
said.</p>
<p>We edged up slowly, taking
care not to disturb the others,
pretending we were sauntering toward
the well on a before-breakfast
stroll.</p>
<p>It was then that Molly came
out of her shack. She stood blinking
for an instant in the dawn
glare, her unbound hair falling
in a tumbled dark mass to her
shoulders, her eyes still drowsy
with sleep. She wore rust-colored
slippers and a form-fitted yellow
robe, belted in at the waist.</p>
<p>Molly wasn't beautiful exactly.
But there was something pulse-stirring
about her and it was easy
to understand how a man like
Kenny might find her difficult to
resist.</p>
<p>Bill slanted a glance at Kenny,
then shrugged and looked straight
at Molly. He turned to me, his
voice almost a whisper, "She's got
to be told, Tom. You do it. She
likes you a lot."</p>
<p>I'd been wondering about that
myself—just how much she liked
me. It was hard to be sure.</p>
<p>Bill saw my hesitation, and
frowned. "You can tell if she's
covering up. Her reaction may
give us a lead."</p>
<p>Molly looked startled when she
saw me approaching without the
mask I usually wore when I
waltzed her around and grinned
and ruffled her hair and told her
that she was the cutest kid imaginable
and would make some man—not
me—a fine wife.</p>
<p>That made telling her all the
harder. The hardest part was at
the end—when she stared at me
dry-eyed and threw her arms
around me as if I was the last
support left to her on Earth.</p>
<p>For a moment I almost forgot
we were not on Earth. On Earth
I might have been able to comfort
her in a completely sane way.
But on Mars when a woman
comes into your arms your emotions
can turn molten in a matter
of seconds.</p>
<p>"Steady," I whispered. "We're
just good friends, remember?"</p>
<p>"I'd be willing to forget, Tom,"
she said.</p>
<p>"You've had a terrible shock,"
I whispered. "You really loved
that little guy—more than you
know. It's natural enough that
you should feel a certain warmth
toward me. I just happened to be
here—so you kissed me."</p>
<p>"No, Tom. It isn't that way
at all—"</p>
<p>I might have let myself go a
little then if Kenny hadn't seen
us. He stood very still for an
instant, staring at Molly. Then
his eyes narrowed and he walked
slowly toward us, his hands still
wedged in his belt.</p>
<p>I looked quickly at Molly, and
saw that her features had
hardened. There was a look of
dark suspicion in her eyes. Bill
had been watching Kenny, too,
waiting for him to move. He
measured footsteps with Kenny,
advancing in the same direction
from a different angle at a pace so
calculated that they seemed to
meet by accident directly in front
of us.</p>
<p>Bill didn't draw but his hand
never left his hip. His voice came
clear and sharp and edged with
cold insistence. "Know anything
about it, Kenny?"</p>
<p>Strain seemed to tighten Kenny's
face, but there was no panic in his
eyes, no actual glint of fear. "What
made you think I'd know?" he
asked.</p>
<p>Bill didn't say a word. He just
started staring at Kenny's shoes.
He stood back a bit and continued
to stare as if something vitally important
had escaped him and
taken refuge beneath the soggy
leather around Kenny's feet.</p>
<p>"What size shoes do you wear,
Jim?" he asked.</p>
<p>Kenny must have suspected
that the question was charged with
as much explosive risk as a
detonating wire set to go off at
the faintest jar. His eyes grew
shrewd and mocking.</p>
<p>"So the guy who did it left
prints in the sand?" he said.
"Prints made by big shoes?"</p>
<p>"That's right," Bill said. "You
have a very active mind."</p>
<p>Kenny laughed then, the
mockery deepening in his stare.
"Well," he said, "suppose we
have a look at those prints, and if
it will ease your mind I'll take
off my shoes and you can try
them out for size."</p>
<p>Kenny and Bill and I walked
slowly from Molly's shack to the
well in the hot and blazing glare,
and the whispering went right on,
getting under our skin in a tormenting
sort of way.</p>
<p>Kenny still wore that disturbing
grin. He looked at the prints
and grunted. "Yeah," he said,
"they sure are big. Biggest prints
I've ever seen."</p>
<p>He sat down and started unlacing
his shoes. First the right
shoe, then the left. He pulled off
both shoes and handed them to
Bill.</p>
<p>"Fit them in," he said.
"Measure them for size. Measure
<i>me</i> for size, and to hell with you!"</p>
<p>Bill made a careful check.
There were eight prints, and he
fitted the shoes painstakingly into
each of them. There was space
to spare at each try.</p>
<p>It cleared Kenny completely.
He wasn't a killer—this time. We
might have roused the camp to a
lynching fury and Kenny would
have died for a crime another man
had committed. I shut my eyes
and saw Larsen swinging from a
roof top, a black hood over his
face. I saw Molly standing in the
sunlight by my side, her face a
stony mask.</p>
<p>I opened my eyes and there
was Kenny, grinning contemptuously
at us. He'd called our bluff
and won out. Now the shoe was
on the other foot.</p>
<p>A cold chill ran up my spine.
It was Kenny who was doing the
staring now, and he was looking
directly at my shoes. He stood
back a bit and continued to stare.
He was dramatizing his sudden
triumph in a way that turned my
blood to ice.</p>
<p>Then I saw that Bill was staring
too—straight at the shoes of
a man he had known for three
years and grown to like and trust.
But underlying the warmth and
friendliness in Bill was a granite-like
integrity which nothing could
shake.</p>
<p>It was Bill who spoke first. "I
guess you'd better take them off,
Tom," he said. "We may as well
be thorough about this."</p>
<p>Sure, I was big. I grew up fast
as a kid and at eighteen I weighed
two hundred and thirty pounds, all
lean flesh. If shoes ran large I
could sometimes cram my feet
into size twelves, but I felt much
more comfortable in a size or two
larger than that.</p>
<p>What made it worse, Molly
liked me. I was involved with
her, but no one knew how much.
No one knew whether we'd quarreled
or not, or how insanely
jealous I could be. No one knew
whether Molly had only pretended
to like Ned while carrying
a torch for me, and how dangerously
complex the situation might
have become all along the line.</p>
<p>I stood very still, listening. The
whispering was so loud now it
drowned out the sighing of the
wind. I looked down at my shoes.
They were caked with mud and
soggy and discolored. Day after
day I'd trudge back and forth
from the canal to the shacks in
the blazing sunlight without giving
my feet a thought until the ache
in them had become intolerable,
rest an absolute necessity.</p>
<p>There was only one thing to do—call
Kenny's bluff so fast he
wouldn't have time to hurl another
accusation at me.</p>
<p>I handed Bill both of my shoes.
He looked at me and nodded. I
waited, listening to the whispering
rise and fall, watching him
stoop and fit the shoes into the
prints on the sand.</p>
<p>He straightened suddenly. His
face was expressionless, but I
could see that he was waging a
terrible inward struggle with himself.</p>
<p>"Your shoes come pretty close
to filling out those prints, Tom,"
he said. "I can't be sure—but a
wax impression test should pretty
well clear this up." He gripped my
arm and nodded toward the
shacks. "Better stick close to me."</p>
<p>Kenny took a slow step backward,
his jaw tightening, his eyes
searching Bill's face. "Wax impression
test, hell!" he said.
"You've got your murderer. I'm
going to see he gets what's coming
to him—right now!"</p>
<p>Bill shook his head. "I'll do
this my way," he said.</p>
<p>Kenny glared at him, then
laughed harshly. "You won't have
a chance," he said. "The boys
won't stand for it. I'm going to
spread the word around, and
you'd better not try to stop me."</p>
<p>That did it. I'd been holding
myself in, but I had a sudden,
overpowering urge to send my
fist crashing into Kenny's face, to
send him crashing to the sand. I
started for him, but he jumped
back and started shouting.</p>
<p>I can't remember exactly what
he shouted. But he said just
enough to put a noose around my
neck. Every man and woman between
the shacks and the well
swung about to stare at me. I saw
shock and rage flare in the eyes of
men who usually had steady
nerves. They were not calm now—not
one of them.</p>
<h3>IV</h3>
<p>It all happened so fast I was
caught off balance. In the harsh
Martian sunlight human emotions
can be as unstable as a wind-lashed
dune.</p>
<p>A crazy thought flashed through
my mind: Will Molly believe this
too? Will she join these madmen
in their wild thirst for vengeance?
My need for her was suddenly
overwhelming. Just seeing her
face would have helped, but now
more men had emerged from the
shacks and I couldn't see beyond
them. They were heading straight
for me and I knew that even Bill
would be powerless to stop them.</p>
<p>You can't argue with an
avalanche. It was rolling straight
toward me, gathering momentum
as it came—not one man or a
dozen, but a solid wall of human
hate and unreason.</p>
<p>Bill stood his ground. He had
drawn his gun, and he started
shouting that the prints couldn't
have been made by my shoes. I
chalked that up to his credit and
resolved never to forget it.</p>
<p>I knew I'd have to make a dash
for it. I ran as fast as I could,
keeping my eyes on the glimmer
of sunlight on rising dunes, and
deep hollows which a carefully
placed bullet could have quickly
changed into a burial mound.</p>
<p>A sudden crackling burst of
gunfire ripped through the air.
Directly in my path the sand geysered
up as the bullets ripped and
tore at it. Somebody wasn't a
good marksman, or had let blind
rage unnerve him and spoil his
aim. A lot of somebodies—for
the firing increased and became
almost continuous for an instant,
a dull crackling which drowned
out the whispering and the sighing
of the wind.</p>
<p>Then abruptly all sound ceased.
Utter stillness descended on the
desert—an unnatural, terrifying
stillness, as if nature herself had
stopped breathing and was waiting
for someone to scream.</p>
<p>I must have been mad to turn.
A weaving target has a chance,
but a target standing motionless
is a sitting duck and his life hangs
by a hair. But still I turned.</p>
<p>Something was happening between
the well and the shacks
which halted the pursuit dead in
its tracks. One of the shacks was
wrapped in darting tongues of
flame, and a woman was screaming,
and a man close to her was
grappling with something huge
and misshapen which loomed
starkly against the dawn glow.</p>
<p>A human shape? I could not
be sure. It seemed monstrous,
with a bulge between its shoulders
which gave a grotesque and distorted
aspect to the shadow which
its weaving bulk cast upon the
sand. I could see the shadow
clearly across three hundred feet
of sand. It lengthened and
shortened, as if an octopus-like
ferocity had given it the power
to distort itself at will, lengthening
its tentacles and then whipping
them back again.</p>
<p>But it was not an octopus. It
had legs and arms, and it was
crushing the man in a grip of
steel. I could see that now. I
stared as the others were staring,
their backs turned to me, their
blind hatred for me blotted out
by that greater horror.</p>
<p>I suddenly realized that the
shape was human. It had the head
and shoulders of a man, and a
torso that could twist with
muscular purpose, and massive
hands that could maul and maim.
It threw the hapless man from it
with a sudden convulsive contraction
of its entire bulk. I had
never seen a human being move
in quite that way, but even as its
violence flared its manlike aspect
became more pronounced.</p>
<p>A frightful thing happened
then. The woman screamed and
rushed toward the brutish maniac
with her fingers splayed. The
swaying figure bent, grabbed her
about the waist, and lifted her
high into the air. I thought for a
moment he was about to crush
her as he had crushed the man.
But I was wrong. She was hurled
to the sand, but with a violence so
brutal that she went instantly limp.</p>
<p>Then the brutal madman
turned, and I saw his face. If
ever monstrous cruelty and malign
cunning looked out of a human
countenance it looked out of the
eyes that stared in my direction,
remorseless in their hate.</p>
<p>I could not tear my gaze from
his face. The hate in it could be
sensed, even across a blinding
haze of sunlight that blotted out
the sharp contours of physical
things. But more than hate could
be sensed. There was something
tremendous about that face, as if
the evil which had ravaged it had
left the searing brand of Lucifer
himself!</p>
<p>For an instant the madman
stood motionless, his ghastly brutality
unchallenged. Then Jeff
Winters started for it. Jeff had
come to Mars alone and grown
more solitary with every passing
day. He was a brooding, ingrown
man, secretive and sullen, with a
streak of wildness which he usually
managed to control. He went
for the madman like a gigantic
terrier pup, shaggy and ferocious
and contemptuous of death.</p>
<p>The big figure turned quickly,
raised his arm, and brought his
closed fist down on Jeff's skull.
Jeff collapsed like a shattered
plaster cast. His body seemed to
break and splinter, and he
sprawled forward on the sand.</p>
<p>He did not get up.</p>
<p>Frank Anders had guns on
both hips, and he drew them fast.
No one knew what kind of man
Anders was. He hardly ever complained
or made a spectacle of
himself. A little guy with sandy
hair and cold blue eyes, he had
an accuracy of aim that did his
talking for him.</p>
<p>His guns suddenly roared. For
an instant the air between his
hands and the maniac was a
crackling wall of flame. The brute
swayed a little but did not turn
aside. He went straight for Anders
with both arms spread wide.</p>
<p>He caught Anders about the
waist, lifted him up, and slammed
his body down against the sand.
A sickness came over me as I
stared. The madman bashed
Anders' head against the ground
again and again. Then suddenly
the big arms relaxed and Anders
sagged limply to the ground.</p>
<p>For an instant the madman
swayed slowly back and forth, like
a blood-stained marionette on a
wire. Then he moved forward
with a terrible, shambling gait, his
head lowered, a dark, misshapen
shadow seeming to lengthen before
him on the sand like a spindle
of flame.</p>
<p>The clearing was abruptly
tumultuous with sound. The fury
which had been unleashed against
me turned upon the monster and
became a closed circle of deadly,
intent purpose hemming him in—and
he was caught in a crossfire
that hurled him backwards to the
sand.</p>
<p>He jumped up and lunged
straight for the well. What
happened then was like the
awakening stages of some horrible
dream. The madman shambled
past the well, the air at his back a
crackling sheet of flame. The
barrage behind him was continuous
and merciless. The men
were organized now, standing together
in a solid wall, firing with
deadly accuracy and a grim purpose
which transcended fear.</p>
<p>The madman went clumping on
past me and climbed a dune with
his shoulders held straight. With a
sunset glare deepening about him,
he went striding over the dune
and out of sight.</p>
<hr>
<p>I turned and stared back at
the camp. The pursuit had passed
the well and was headed for me.
But no one paid the slightest attention
to me. Twelve men passed
me, walking three abreast. Bill
came along in their wake, his eyes
stony hard. He reached out as he
passed me, gripping my shoulder,
giving me a foot-of-the-gallows
kind of smile.</p>
<p>"We know now who killed
Ned," he whispered. "We know,
fella. Take it easy, relax."</p>
<p>My head was throbbing, but I
could see the big prints from
where I stood—the prints of a
murderer betrayed by his insatiable
urge to slay.</p>
<p>I saw Kenny pass, and he gave
me a contemptuous grin. He had
done his best to destroy me, but
there was no longer any hate left
in me.</p>
<p>I took a slow step forward—and
fell flat on my face....</p>
<p>I woke up with my head in
Molly's lap. She was looking
down into my face, sobbing in a
funny sort of way and running
her fingers through my hair.</p>
<p>She looked startled when she
saw that I was wide awake. She
blinked furiously and started
fumbling at her waist for a handkerchief.</p>
<p>"I must have passed out cold,"
I said. "It's quite a strain to be
at the receiving end of a lynching
bee. And what I saw afterwards
wasn't exactly pleasant."</p>
<p>"Darling," she whispered,
"don't move, don't say a word.
You're going to be all right."</p>
<p>"You bet I am!" I said. "Right
now I feel great."</p>
<p>My arm went around her
shoulder, and I drew her head
down until her breath was warm
on my face. I kissed her hair and
lips and eyes for a full minute in
utter recklessness.</p>
<p>When I released her her eyes
were shining, and she was laughing
a little and crying too. "You've
changed your mind," she said.
"You believe me now, don't you?"</p>
<p>"Don't talk," I said. "Don't
say another word. I just want to
look at you."</p>
<p>"It was you right from the
start," she said. "Not Ned—or
anyone else."</p>
<p>"I was a blind fool," I said.</p>
<p>"You never gave me a second
glance."</p>
<p>"One glance was enough," I
whispered. "But when I saw how
it seemed to be between you and
Ned—"</p>
<p>"I was never in love with him.
It was just—"</p>
<p>"Never mind, don't say it," I
said. "It's over and done with."</p>
<p>I stopped, remembering. Her
eyes grew wide and startled, and
I could see that she was remembering
too.</p>
<p>"What happened?" I asked.
"Did they catch that vicious rat?"</p>
<p>She brushed back her hair, the
sunlight suddenly harsh on her
face. "He fell into the canal.
The bullets brought him down,
and he collapsed on the bank."</p>
<p>Her hand tightened on my
wrist. "Bill told me. He tried to
swim, but the current carried him
under. He went down and never
came up."</p>
<p>"I'm glad," I said. "Did anyone
in the camp ever see him before?"</p>
<p>Molly shook her head. "Bill
said he was a drifter—a dangerous
maniac who must have been
crazed by the sun."</p>
<p>"I see," I said.</p>
<p>I reached out and drew her into
my arms again, and we rested for
a moment stretched out side by
side on the sand.</p>
<p>"It's funny," I said after a
while.</p>
<p>"What is?"</p>
<p>"You know what they say about
the whispering. Sometimes when
you listen intently you seem to
hear words deep in your mind.
As if the Martians had telepathic
powers."</p>
<p>"Perhaps they have," she
said.</p>
<p>I glanced sideways at her. "Remember,"
I said. "There were
cities on Mars when our ancestors
were hairy apes. The Martian
civilization was flourishing and
great fifty million years before the
pyramids arose as a monument to
human solidarity and worth. A
bad monument, built by slave
labor. But at least it was a start."</p>
<p>"Now you're being poetic,
Tom," she said.</p>
<p>"Perhaps I am. The Martians
must have had their pyramids
too. And at the pyramid stage
they must have had their Larsens,
to shoulder all the guilt. To them
we may still be in the pyramid
stage. Suppose—"</p>
<p>"Suppose what?"</p>
<p>"Suppose they wanted to warn
us, to give us a lesson we couldn't
forget. How can we say with
certainty that a dying race couldn't
still make use of certain techniques
that are far beyond us."</p>
<p>"I'm afraid I don't understand,"
she said, puzzled.</p>
<p>"Someday," I said, "our own
science will take a tiny fragment
of human tissue from the body of
a dead man, put it into an incubating
machine, and a new man
will arise again from that tiny
shred of flesh. A man who can
walk and live and breathe again,
and love again, and die again after
another full lifetime.</p>
<p>"Perhaps the Martian science
was once as great as that. And
the Martians might still remember
a few of the techniques. Perhaps
from our human brains, from our
buried memories and desires, they
could filch the key and bring to
horrible life a thing so monstrous
and so terrible—"</p>
<p>Her hand went suddenly cold
in mine. "Tom, you can't honestly
think—"</p>
<p>"No," I said. "It's nonsense, of
course. Forget it."</p>
<p>I didn't tell her what the whispering
had seemed to say, deep
in my mind.</p>
<p><i>We've brought you Larsen!
You wanted Larsen, and we've
made him for you! His flesh and
his mind—his cruel strength and
his wicked heart! Here he comes,
here he is! Larsen, Larsen, Larsen!</i></p>
